Q: stack vs heap
A: heap is a term related to the jvm, The heap is the run-time data area from which memory for all class instances and arrays is allocated.
   The heap is created on virtual machine start-up. Heap storage for objects is reclaimed by an automatic storage management system(gc).
   
   stack is a term related to the jvm, the stack is per thread memory storage that stores frames. it is used as a part of method invocation.
   it holds local variables and partial results,
   
Q: metaspace
A: off heap area used for classes metadata such as runtime representations of loaded classes, method definitions, vtables, and constant pools.
   replaced the permgen that was relevent untill java 7. 

Q: Classloader mechnism
A: A class loader is an object that is responsible for loading classes. The class ClassLoader is an abstract class. Given the binary name of a class, 
   a class loader should attempt to locate or generate data that constitutes a definition for the class. 
   A typical strategy is to transform the name into a file name and then read a "class file" of that name from a file system. 

Q: Byteode
A: intermediate language that the jvm compailes the java code into that makes java WORA.


Q: JIT compilation
A: It is a process that dynamically optimizes the performance of a Java application during runtime.

Q: stop the world pauses 
A: event that pasue the jvm exectution of the application to execute backgroun tasks that are related to the
   total health of the application(like gc)

Q: g1 gc
A: multiprocessor machines scaling to a large amount of memory. 
   It attempts to meet garbage collection pause-time goals with high probability while achieving high throughput with little need for configuration.
   
Q: What is the difference between a class and an object in Java? 
A: the diffrence between classes and objects is: class is the blueprint to create an object.

Q: How do constructors differ from regular methods in Java?  
A: constructors differ from regular methods in a way that constructos are a function that are called in an automatic way
   when creating an object. 

Q: Explain the difference between public, protected, private, and default access modifiers.  
A: access modifers are an attribute added to each entity in java to detiermin whether other entities can use it methods.
   public - accessible from anywhere in the program.
   protected - accessible within the same package and by subclasses
   private - accessible only within the same class
   default - accessible only within the same package

Q: Can a subclass access the private fields of its parent class? Why or why not?  
A: No, a subclass cannot directly access the private fields of its parent class.

Q: What is the difference between checked and unchecked exceptions? Give examples.  
A: checked exceptions are exceptions that are checked at compile time, forcing the programmer to handle them explicitly. IOException, SQLException, FileNotFoundException.
   unchecked exception are exceptions that are checked at runtime and do not require explicit handling at compile time. NullPointerException, ArrayIndexOutOfBoundsException.
   the diffrence between them are the ability of the compiler to enforce the handling of the exception.

Q: How would you implement a custom checked exception?  
A: the ability to implement a custom check exception gives you more clearens about error occuring in you code.

Q: When should you use an interface instead of an abstract class?  
A: An abstract class is a class that cannot be instantiated and is used as a base for other classes.
   An interface is a blueprint that defines a set of methods a class must implement.
   you should use an interface instead of an interface over an abstract class when you want to establish a strict contract for behavior, allow a class to inherit from multiple sources

Q: Can an abstract class have implemented methods? Can an interface? Explain.  
A: yes they both can have implemeted methods.

Q: Why are generics useful in Java collections? Give an example.  
A:  Type Safety: Ensures only the specified type can be added to the collection, preventing accidental insertion of the wrong type.
    Avoid Casting: Eliminates the need for explicit type casting when retrieving elements from the collection.
    Code Reusability: The same generic class or method can be reused with different data types without rewriting code.
    Improved Readability and Maintainability: Clearly specifies the type of elements stored, making the code easier to understand and maintain.

Q: How do enums improve type safety compared to constant variables?  
A: Enums improve type safety by creating a distinct, restricted type that constraints a variable or parameter to a predefined set of valid values, 
   whereas independent constant variables rely on broad primitive types like strings or integers. 

Q: What problem does Optional solve? How do you avoid NullPointerException with it?  
A: the `optional` attribute solve the nullPointerException because it provides a wrapper object that explicitly indicates a value might be missing.

Q: Give an example of a functional interface and a lambda expression that implements it.  
A: import java.util.function.Predicate;

public class LambdaExample {
    public static void main(String[] args) {
        
        // Lambda expression implementing the 'test' method of Predicate
        Predicate<String> isEmptyPredicate = (String s) -> s.isEmpty();

        // Testing the lambda implementation
        System.out.println(isEmptyPredicate.test(""));     // Output: true
        System.out.println(isEmptyPredicate.test("Java")); // Output: false
    }
}

Q: What is the difference between the Stack and the Heap in Java memory management?  
A: Stack memory is used for method calls, local variables, and references. 
   Memory is automatically allocated when a method starts and cleared when it ends. Data exists only during the method’s execution. 
   Heap memory is used for objects and instance variables created using the new keyword. 
   The size depends on the class structure. The Garbage Collector manages this area by removing unused objects.

Q: Explain the ClassLoader mechanism and why parent delegation is important.  
A: classLoader mechainsem is the abilily of the jvm to compile class from text files(.class) to memory objects.
   the classloader mechanisem is loaded the distinguish between diffrent classloaders:
	* Bootstrap ClassLoader - The highest level loader in Java. This responsible for loading core Java classes, such as java.lang.String and java.util.List.
	* Extension (or Platform) ClassLoader - Loads classes that extend the functionality of the core Java platform. Typically loads classes from the jre/lib/ext folder or other extension directories.
	* Application (or System) ClassLoader - The loader that handles your own project classes.It Loads classes from the classpath…for example, the folder where your compiled .class files are located

    when a class is loaded into the memory it delegtes the request between the application -> extention -> bootstrap.

Q: How does the G1 Garbage Collector reduce stop-the-world pauses?  
A: the g1 garbage collector reduce stop the world pauses collecting memory in an optimized way like:
	* Region-Based Heap Division: Instead of contiguous memory for generations, G1 divides the heap into thousands of smaller, discrete regions. 
				     This isolates garbage collection to a subset of regions, copying live objects out and freeing massive blocks at a time.
	* Concurrent Marking: G1 runs a background thread to calculate object reachability across the entire heap while your application is still executing. 
			      This significantly reduces the time it needs to stop the application to finalize the object graph.

Q: What are annotations in Java and how are they used?  
A: Annotations in Java are a form of metadata that provide additional information about the program. 
   They do not change the action of a compiled program but can be used by the compiler or runtime for processing.
   class Animal {
    void makeSound() {
     System.out.println("Animal sound");
  }
}

class Dog extends Animal {
   @z
   void makeSound() {
     System.out.println("Woof!");
  }
} 

Q: How does Lombok reduce boilerplate code in Java projects?  
A: lombon library reduce boilerplate code in java projects by creating annotations for common operations(getters, setters) that makes code Redundant

Q: Give an example of a Lombok annotation and explain what it does.  
A: @getter - get the value of the a class varible.

Q: What is the difference between `map`, `filter`, and `reduce` in the Streams API?  
A: the diffrence is map transforms elements, filter eliminates elements based on a condition, and reduce combines all elements into a single summary result.

Q: How would you use `flatMap` in a stream of lists?  
A: List<List<Integer>> nestedList = Arrays.asList(
            Arrays.asList(1, 2, 3),
            Arrays.asList(4, 5),
            Arrays.asList(6, 7, 8)
        );

   List<Integer> flattenedList = nestedList.stream()
            .flatMap(List::stream) // Or use the lambda: list -> list.stream()
            .toList();             // Collects into a single List<Integer>

   System.out.println(flattenedList); 

Q: What is the purpose of `collect` and `Collectors.groupingBy` in streams?  
A: In Java Streams, collect is a terminal operation that gathers stream elements into a final result, such as a List or Map. 
   Collectors.groupingBy is a specific built-in utility that categorizes data into groups based on a condition—much like an SQL GROUP BY clause.

Q: How can you create and run a parallel stream, and what are its benefits?  
A: to create a parallel stream use the method `.parallelStream()` on a collection and execute a method on it like:
   listOfNumbers.parallelStream().forEach(number ->
       System.out.println(number + " " + Thread.currentThread().getName())
   );

   the benefit of using parallel stream is the aceleration of program

Q: What is a JAR file and how do you create one in Java?  
A: a file format used spesificy for java that allows comppression of multiple files into a single archived file.
   you can create a jar file using the jar cli with the cf flags or use a depdencies manager like maven.

Q: What is Maven and how does it help in Java project management?  
A: maven is a java tool used for managin java application dependencies.
   It uses an XML-based configuration file called pom.xml to define project structure, dependencies, plugins, and build phases.

Q: Explain stop-the-world pauses and why tuning garbage collection is important in JVM.  
A: event that pasue the jvm exectution of the application to execute backgroun tasks that are related to the
   total health of the application(like gc), it is importent to tune the gc because it impact the apllication
   latency and avalability.

Q: `map`
A: method that is applied to an element in some sort of data structure way and returns the element with the changes applied.

Q: `filter`
A: method that is applied to a data structure and returned all the elements that match a conditions.

Q: `reduce`
A: method that is applied to data structure and reducts elements using an associative accumulation function.

Q: `collect`
A: method that is applied to data structure and transform it into a given data structure.

Q: `flatMap`
A: method that is applied to a nested data structure and transform it into a flat data structure.

Q: `groupingBy`
A: method that Groups elements by a specific property and returns a Map<Key, List<Value>>.

Q: `partitioningBy`
A: method that spilits elements exaclty two groups based on a true/false condition. It always return a Map<Boolean, List<Value>>.

Q: `parallelStream()`
A: a method that returns a possibly parallel Stream with this collection as its source. It is allowable for this method to return a sequential stream. 

Skila:
Q: where each object is save(heap/stack)?
A:  stack:
	Method Invocation (Frame Creation): When a thread calls a method, the JVM allocates a temporary block of memory called a Stack Frame and pushes it onto the top of the stack.
	Data Storage: This frame stores local variables of primitive types (like int, double, boolean) and references (pointers) to objects that live on the Heap.
	Execution: The CPU executes the method's instructions using the data inside this top frame.
	Method Return (Frame Destruction): As soon as the method finishes executing, its Stack Frame is popped off the stack. The memory is immediately reclaimed by the OS. No Garbage Collector is needed here.

Q: phisical representation of what is saved in the metaspace?
A: the phisical representation of the bytecode of the methods.

Q: old vs young generation
A: When Eden fills up, a Minor GC is triggered. The GC looks only at the New Gen. 
   It quickly identifies which objects are still in use, moves them to a Survivor space, and instantly wipes Eden clean.
   Every time an object survives a Minor GC cycle in the Survivor space, its "age" (tenure counter) increments. Once it survives enough rounds (crossing the tenuring threshold), 
   it gets "promoted" to the Old Gen. Long-lived objects, like database connection pools, Spring beans, or global configurations, live here.

Q: what is the benifit of stream vs parallel stream?
A: A parallel stream automatically splits your data into chunks and processes them concurrently across multiple CPU cores using the ForkJoinPool.

Q: what is the maven life cycle?
A: the maven life cycle is:
	* validate - Verifies the project structure and downloads necessary configuration requirements.
	* compile - Transforms source code (.java files) into executable bytecode (.class files).
	* test - Executes unit tests using frameworks like JUnit or TestNG without packaging the code.
	* package - Compresses the compiled bytecode into its shipping format, such as a JAR or WAR file.
	* verify - Runs integration tests to ensure the packaged file complies with quality thresholds.
	* install - Moves the packaged file into your local repository (~/.m2), making it accessible to other local projects.
	* deploy - Uploads the final build artifact to a remote shared repository (e.g., Nexus or Artifactory)

Q: what is supressed uncheck function?
A: The @SuppressWarnings("unchecked") annotation tells the Java compiler to ignore "unchecked" warnings. 
   These warnings occur when performing operations (like casting) involving Java generics where the compiler cannot guarantee type-safety at compile time.
